I’m trying to convert ZZT into an MMO. The source (unfortunately in Turbo Pascal) is available here: https://github.com/asiekierka/reconstruction-of-zzt

The issue is the dated code, because it will need to first run after modifications are made, and then integrate some fairly major changes in the way the Player character is controlled in a multiplayer environment.

I am looking for you to determine an approach for how to solve this problem, and if possible, construct code so this can be done. I want you to analyze different approaches, look deep into the code, and come up with an elegant solution as an expert Turbo Pascal coder and a whiz at converting legacy games into MMOs

That sounds like an awesome and ambitious project. To give you the most actionable approach, could you please clarify a few points:

What platform or engine do you ultimately want this MMO version of ZZT to run on (e.g., browser, PC client, Unity/Unreal, etc.)?
Are you aiming to retain the original Turbo Pascal codebase and build networking on top, or are you open to fully rewriting ZZT in a modern language?
What kind of multiplayer model are you envisioning — synchronous MMO with hundreds of players per world, small cooperative multiplayer, or something else?
What features from the original ZZT do you want to preserve as-is (e.g., built-in editor, scripting system, physics)?
Are you the only developer, or is this part of a team project?

Once I have this, I can analyze the code and propose an architecture, toolchain, and specific examples of code modifications or rewrites to get this rolling.

1. Browser
2. I’m open to either, whatever you think is the most prudent choice, although converting the code from Turbo Pascal to almost any other language including Free Pascal is a huge work effort. Similarly, creating the exact same behavior of ZZT in another language is extremely complicated as well. The good news is that the codebase is very small and can be systematically analyzed at a granular level.
3. Ideally synchronous MMO, although I’m open to small cooperative multiplayer on the scale of about 100 players at once.
4. I would like to start by emulating the playing environment and then move on to editing.
5. I (along with you and other AI systems!) am the only current programmer. I am extremely familiar with ZZT but lack deep Turbo Pascal experience. I think we can work together on a synthesis of AI and human work to create this incredible project!

Excellent — I’ll dig into the ZZT Turbo Pascal codebase and identify a detailed, viable architecture to evolve it into a browser-based MMO. I’ll also evaluate options between modernizing the original code versus rewriting, and how to handle multiplayer synchronization with up to 100 concurrent players.

I'll propose a phased plan with technical recommendations and code-level strategies tailored to the constraints you've shared. Give me a bit to return with a thorough breakdown.

Research completed in 9m · 20 sources
Converting ZZT to a Browser-Based MMO: Feasibility & Architectural Plan
Introduction and Goals

ZZT is a classic 1991 text-based game and engine written in Turbo Pascal. It features an ASCII graphical world, a built-in editor, and a simple scripting language (ZZT-OOP) for objects. The goal of this project is to transform ZZT into a synchronous browser-based MMO supporting ~100 concurrent players. This entails porting the game to modern web technologies and introducing networking and multiplayer support, all while preserving ZZT’s gameplay behavior. Key objectives include:

Running the ZZT engine in a web browser (via JavaScript/TypeScript or WebAssembly).
Modifying or rewriting the code to support multiple players in one world.
Focusing first on the core gameplay engine (world simulation and scripting), with the editor and other extras to be added later.
Designing a robust multiplayer architecture (server/client model, state sync) that is maintainable and scalable.

Below we outline the feasibility of reusing the old code vs rewriting, identify major components of the ZZT engine and how to adapt them for multiplayer, and propose an elegant client-server architecture for synchronization. Relevant open-source projects and examples are cited as references.

Feasibility: Reusing Turbo Pascal Code vs Rewriting in a Modern Language

Converting Turbo Pascal code from 1991 to run in browsers is challenging but possible. We consider two approaches:

Reuse and Transpile/Compile the Existing Code: Since the ZZT codebase is small (a handful of .PAS files), one option is to reuse it by translating or cross-compiling to a web-compatible form. For example, projects like Reconstruction of ZZT provide the exact Turbo Pascal source for ZZT 3.2. Efforts by others show that automated or semi-automated translation is feasible: Ben Hoyt’s experiment converted ZZT’s Pascal to Go with only minor manual fixes. Similarly, Adrian Siekierka (author of the reconstruction) created libzoo, a portable C reimplementation of ZZT’s engine, essentially transcribing the Pascal logic into C. These demonstrate that the original code can be carried over to modern languages without altering behavior, thanks to ZZT’s relatively straightforward logic. Reusing code (or using libzoo) could save time in implementing the ZZT-OOP scripting and all the quirky mechanics exactly as in the original. It also reduces the risk of introducing behavioral bugs, since the logic is preserved verbatim. Another reuse approach is compiling to WebAssembly: using a Pascal compiler or the C port to target WebAssembly would allow running the core engine in the browser at near-native speed.

 

Challenges of Reuse: The Turbo Pascal code is structured for DOS—direct keyboard reads, writing to text-mode video memory, and global state assumptions for single-player. Integrating it with a browser environment means these parts must be heavily refactored or stubbed out. If using the code via WebAssembly or a library, one must create bindings for JavaScript (for rendering, input, networking) and possibly modify the code for reentrancy or multiple players. The developer’s lack of familiarity with Pascal could make debugging and extending this code difficult. Also, adding multiplayer support would still require significant changes to the logic (e.g. supporting multiple player objects instead of one), so the advantage of a “drop-in” reuse is limited.

Full Rewriting in a Modern Language: Given the small size of ZZT’s codebase, a clean rewrite in a modern language (TypeScript, JavaScript, or Rust) is a compelling option. This allows designing the architecture from the ground up with multiplayer in mind, and using a language the developer is comfortable with. The core game mechanics of ZZT (board layout, element interactions, turn-based object cycles) are well-documented and now understood from the open source code. In fact, there have been “various attempts over the years to recreate the game in other languages, including C++, a partial implementation in JavaScript, and even an accurate reimplementation in Rust”. The existence of projects like RUZZT (a Rust ZZT engine clone) and ZZT.js (a JavaScript port) confirms that others have successfully ported ZZT to modern languages, and these can serve as references or even starting points. A rewrite would make it easier to introduce new structures (like multiple players and networking) in an organized, modular way without fighting against the original Pascal design. It also makes maintainability higher in the long run – the code will be clearer, and you can leverage modern development tools, debugging, and libraries (e.g. using Canvas API for rendering, structured data for state, etc).

 

Challenges of Rewriting: The biggest risk is deviating from the original game’s exact behavior. ZZT has many subtle quirks (e.g. exact movement rules, edge-case bugs that became features, timing details, etc.) that the community expects. A rewrite must be carefully verified against known worlds to ensure compatibility. You would need to implement the ZZT-OOP scripting interpreter from scratch – a non-trivial task, but fortunately ZZT-OOP is a relatively simple command/script system, and the reconstructed source or libzoo can serve as a guide. Rewriting is more upfront work; however, given that multiplayer will force changes anyway, the effort may be justified. Testing throughout (comparing outputs of the original and new engine on various worlds) can mitigate the risk of discrepancies.

Recommendation: Favor a modern rewrite or semi-rewrite guided by the original code. In practice, this could mean using an existing reimplementation as a base (for example, using libzoo’s logic or RUZZT’s engine module) or translating the Pascal code to a high-level language like TypeScript. This approach preserves correctness (by referencing the known-good logic) while allowing the flexibility to design for multiplayer and the web. The Pascal code can be used as a specification for behavior, but the new implementation can be cleaner. If time or accuracy is a major concern, an interim step could be compiling the C port (libzoo) to WebAssembly to get a working single-player prototype quickly, then incrementally refactoring or extending it for multiplayer. Otherwise, proceeding with a full TypeScript or Rust rewrite (whichever the developer is most comfortable with in a browser context) will likely yield the best long-term outcome in terms of maintainability and elegance.

Key Architectural Components of ZZT and Mapping to Multiplayer

To design the MMO version, we must understand ZZT’s original architecture. The core components of the ZZT engine include the world model and board data, rendering and UI, input handling, the game loop and timing, the object/scripting engine (ZZT-OOP interpreter and built-in behaviors), and the editor. Below we break down each and discuss how to adapt or extend it for a multiplayer, browser-based environment:

World Representation (Board, Elements, and Objects): In ZZT, the game world is divided into boards (levels). Each board is a grid of cells (typically 60×25 visible text grid) containing elements (walls, empty space, objects, creatures, items, etc.). Dynamic elements that have state (like creatures or the player) are represented as objects in a list often called the “stat list”. The original engine has a fixed limit of 150 active objects ("stats") per board (with one slot reserved for the player). Each object has properties like position, direction, cycle timing, health/ammo (for player), etc., and possibly an attached script. In single-player ZZT, there is exactly one player object (usually stat element #0) and all game logic assumes a single player’s inventory (health, score, keys) stored in the world state.

 

Multiplayer Mapping: For an MMO, the world grid and basic board layout can remain the same, but we must support multiple player objects existing simultaneously. This likely means lifting or increasing the stat limit (to allow, say, 100 players + other creatures) and altering any data structures that assumed a single player. In a rewritten engine, this is as simple as not hardcoding one player – we can treat players as a type of creature object. Each player will have their own stats like health, ammo, keys, etc., so those must be tracked per object (instead of global variables). For example, instead of World.Info.Health as a single value, the Player object’s state could include a health field. We will need to modify interactions accordingly: if a lion attacks “the player,” in multi-world it should attack any player on that tile; if an object gives a key to the player, it should give it to the specific player that touched it. This requires careful adjustment of all places in the logic where “player” is assumed unique. A simple approach is to define one canonical “Player” element type, but allow many instances of it. Any condition or action targeting the player will operate on whichever player instance is relevant (e.g. “touching player” is true if touching any player object). World state serialization will also change: the engine should be able to serialize the state of multiple players. We might not initially worry about saving to the original .ZZT world format (which can’t represent multiple players anyway), but we do need a format to send the world state to clients (likely a custom JSON or binary message). In summary, the board grid and element definitions can be mostly reused, but we add support for multi-player objects and possibly larger object counts.

Rendering and UI: The original ZZT renders in text mode (16-color ASCII characters) directly to the DOS screen buffer. The code uses direct video memory writes or BIOS interrupts for text output (handled in VIDEO.PAS and related modules). The UI consists of the main board view and a side status panel (showing the player’s health, ammo, etc., and messages). In the browser, we cannot use text mode, so we must implement rendering via web technologies. The simplest approach is using an HTML5 Canvas to draw characters or tiles that represent each cell. For example, we can use a tileset image or a monospace font to draw the ASCII characters in the proper colors for each board cell. Another approach is using DOM elements (like a grid of <div> or <span> elements styled with background color and text), though that may be less efficient than canvas for 1500+ cells updating frequently. We also need to render the UI/HUD (which may need redesign in a multi-player context).

 

Multiplayer Mapping: Rendering on each client will be based on the shared game state. In a client-server model, the server will hold the authoritative state of the world and send updates; each client then draws the world. We should ensure the rendering is decoupled from game logic: the engine can maintain a 2D array or similar representation of the board’s current characters (like a buffer of what char/color at each position), and the client will simply render that. For multiple players, the status panel needs changes – e.g. each client should see their own health, ammo, etc. We might replace the single-player status sidebar with a different UI, such as each player’s stats shown near their viewport or a floating element over their character, or a list of players. Initially, we can implement a basic HUD for the connected player and possibly a simple list of other players online. The key is that the rendering module should be modular: it takes a world state (with all objects’ positions, etc.) and draws it in the browser, without containing game logic itself. This will allow us to swap in different frontends (e.g. a debug text console or the editor view) while using the same core engine.

Input Handling: ZZT’s input (handled in INPUT.PAS/KEYS.PAS) reads keystrokes from the user to move the player or perform actions (shoot, open menus). The original game uses a single keyboard buffer for the one player. For the MMO, input will come from multiple clients over the network. Each client’s keystrokes should control their own player character. We will capture input via JavaScript event listeners (for keydown, etc.) in each browser client. The challenge is to feed these inputs into the game engine in a synchronized way. In a client-server setup, a player’s input must be sent to the server (e.g. via WebSocket) and then the server injects it into the simulation, updating that player object’s direction or action. We must ensure inputs are processed in the correct order and timely manner to keep all players in sync.

 

Multiplayer Mapping: We will design the game loop so that input collection is separate from simulation (e.g. gather all inputs for the tick, then update world state). Each input message will include the player ID and the action (e.g. “Player 5 pressed up”). The server will translate that into the corresponding engine command (move that player if possible, fire bullet, etc.). If rewriting, it’s wise to implement an input queue or event system in the engine: instead of directly reading the keyboard, the engine exposes functions like movePlayer(playerId, direction) which can be called with network input. In the browser client, we might do some local handling for responsiveness (like showing the movement immediately and waiting for server confirmation), but given ZZT’s relatively slow pace and tile-based movement, we might keep it simple and authoritative (the client sends a key and waits for the server update). We will use different key mappings for different players if needed (e.g. two players on one keyboard for local testing), but in the MMO case each user has their own keyboard controlling their avatar. Anti-cheat or rate-limit measures might be needed (to prevent a client from sending movement too fast), but that can be addressed later. The main change is that inputs go through the network and are tied to specific player objects, rather than directly manipulating a single global player.

Game Loop and Timing: ZZT’s engine runs in cycles. It processes each object in the stat list in order, executing their logic (either built-in behavior or one step of their script) each cycle. The original timing is tied to CPU speed with a timing loop to regulate cycles per second (and a game speed setting). We will likely implement a fixed timestep for the server simulation (e.g. 10 ticks per second or matching ZZT’s normal speed). The loop does: read input, update all objects (move actors, decrement timers, etc.), handle interactions (like collisions), then render/update output.

 

Multiplayer Mapping: With networking, maintaining a synchronized tick is crucial. We will run the main game loop on the server so that there is a single authority on the order of object updates and outcomes. The tick rate should be consistent for all clients. A likely approach is to have the server run, say, 8 ticks per second (to mimic ZZT’s default pace) and after each tick (or every few ticks), broadcast the updated state to clients. Clients will then render that state on their next animation frame. We might also send out immediate events (like “player moved”) for smoother client-side interpolation, but initially a lockstep with the server tick is acceptable given ZZT’s low update rate. Importantly, we need to ensure determinism on the server side: if we ever ran part of the simulation on clients, differences in timing or floating-point could desynchronize them. To avoid that, all game rules will be executed on the server (in Node.js or a server-side WASM), and clients are passive viewers/controllers. The game loop will thus reside in one place. We will also need to handle pausing or slowdowns properly – e.g. if the original game had a pause, in MMO pausing the whole game might not make sense unless an admin does it. Another timing aspect: ZZT-OOP has a concept of cycle length for each object (some objects run every tick, some every other tick, etc.). This will remain the same, just that there are more objects. The server must also handle potentially 100 players worth of actions (which is still fine given the simplicity – even with 200 objects, an update at 10 Hz is not computationally heavy). We must be mindful of concurrency: multiple players might trigger things at nearly the same time. The server loop should probably process one tick’s worth of input from all players then update, rather than updating per input in isolation, to maintain a consistent order. In summary, the loop stays similar but is centralized on the server and tuned for network tick rate.

Object Behavior and Scripting Engine (ZZT-OOP): ZZT’s charm comes from its objects and scripting. Built-in elements (like creatures, bullets, doors) have hardcoded behaviors in the engine (defined in ELEMENTS.PAS and related code). For example, a bear moves randomly, a tiger chases the player, bullets move fast and do damage on contact, etc. Custom objects use the ZZT-OOP scripting language which the engine interprets line by line for each object. The interpreter supports commands like #move, #shoot, conditional checks (?seek to find player, etc.), message passing (#send label to other object), and so on. In the original single-player, scripts often assume one player (for instance, if touching player or sending messages like “You found a secret”). The scripting system is essentially a simple cooperatively-multitasked scheduler: each object runs a bit of its script each cycle (maybe one command per tick, or until it yields). All of this is implemented in the original codebase and will need to be either reused or rewritten.

 

Multiplayer Mapping: Adapting the scripting system is one of the trickier parts of making ZZT multiplayer. The goal should be that existing ZZT worlds (which were made for one player) can still run in a meaningful way with many players present. This likely means interpreting any script references to “the player” as applying to any relevant player. For example, #if contact player (meaning if this object is touching the player’s tile) should trigger if touching any player. If an object script gives the player an item (#give ammo 5), we must decide how to handle it: probably give it to the specific player who touched or interacted with that object. We might need to extend the ZZT-OOP language for multiplayer, but initially it may be enough to contextualize the commands by the triggering player. A possible implementation: when an object’s script is executed in response to something a player did (e.g. the player bumped into it, or sent a message), we set a “current actor” reference so that give and similar commands know which player to affect. In broadcast situations (like an object that periodically spawns an enemy or prints a message), it can affect the world generally (e.g. message goes to all players’ screens). Another consideration is message passing: ZZT-OOP objects can send messages (“#send label”) to each other or to the player. In multi, objects could potentially send a message to one player’s object specifically. We might leave this as a later enhancement – initially, treat all players uniformly (e.g. a message intended to the player is delivered to all, or to the one relevant player if it was a direct interaction).

 

The interpreter itself can be ported from the original code or reimplemented by parsing the object code that is stored in the world files. Reusing it via libzoo or similar might give a quick path to having a working script engine. If rewriting, we’d parse the script (which is stored as text in world files) either into an intermediate form or interpret it on the fly. Performance is not a huge issue given the simplicity and low frequency (scripts are short and run over many ticks). One must be careful to maintain the exact semantics of commands (there are many edge cases in ZZT-OOP). Since the scripting touches game state (including possibly pausing the game, ending the game, changing boards, etc.), it has to be deeply integrated with the engine logic.

 

To make this modular for networking, the script engine’s operations should all go through the same game state interface the rest of the engine uses. For example, when a script says “#move n”, the implementation will call something like moveObject(objectId, north) in the engine, which in a server context will also trigger a state update that eventually gets sent to clients. As long as the core engine is authoritative, scripts running on the server naturally affect all players.

 

Summary for scripting: support all existing commands so that worlds behave correctly, but adapt the meaning of “player-specific” actions to a multi-player scenario (possibly defaulting to “affect the triggering player” and broadcasting messages to all). This ensures the gameplay logic still makes sense. We might eventually introduce new script commands to address multiplayer explicitly (e.g. a way for a script to check the number of players or target a specific player), but that’s beyond initial scope. The initial goal is emulating the single-player world in a multi setting, which we can achieve by treating all players equivalently in script logic.

Editor and Content Creation Tools: ZZT’s built-in editor allows the user to edit boards, place elements, and write object code. It’s a significant part of the original program (handled in EDITOR.PAS and related UI code). For the MMO conversion, the editor is a lower priority (per the user’s note) and can be tackled after the game itself is running multiplayer. The editor in an MMO context could be a collaborative world-building tool, but that introduces even more complexity (permissions, real-time sync of editing). As a starting point, we can omit the editor or make it a single-user admin tool.

 

Multiplayer Mapping: Initially, do not implement the editor in the browser. We assume worlds (.ZZT files) will be created offline or pre-made and then loaded on the server. The focus is on the playing environment. However, we will keep the architecture open for adding an editor later. This means ensuring that the engine can load and initialize a world from data (which can come from a file or an editor UI), and possibly that it can save or modify the world state. If we design the engine with a clear API (e.g. functions to add/remove an object, change a tile, etc.), then a browser-based editor interface could call those when a user edits a board. For now, we simply note that the editor is out-of-scope for initial development. When the time comes, one could implement the editor as a separate mode in the client (maybe only accessible to the developer or moderators in the MMO) that uses the same rendering module but with interactive controls to modify the board. The editor’s existence does not heavily affect the core multiplayer design except that the engine should support modular world data (so that a new or edited board can be loaded without restarting the whole server, perhaps).

Sound and Music: ZZT has simple sound (PC speaker style tones defined in the world files for certain events). In a browser, we can use the Web Audio API to play beep tones or short generated sounds to emulate ZZT’s sound effects. This is a relatively minor component but still part of the experience. It can be handled entirely client-side: when a client receives a game event that in ZZT would produce a sound (e.g. a tone sequence from an object or a bullet firing if we want a sound), the client can play the corresponding audio. Since all clients will get the same events, they can all play the sounds (or the option to mute). We don’t need to stream audio; just trigger sound playback based on game state. This can be added once the rest is functioning.

By analyzing these components, we see that the core data structures and logic of ZZT can be preserved, but we must systematically remove the single-user assumptions and separate the concerns of input, output, and simulation. In practical terms, the new architecture will break the old monolithic DOS program into modular subsystems – a world model, an engine loop, a rendering layer, and a network layer – to facilitate multiplayer.

Proposed Multiplayer Architecture and State Synchronization

To enable up to 100 players to play ZZT together synchronously, a robust networking architecture is needed. The two fundamental models in multiplayer game design are deterministic lockstep (clients run the same simulation, only inputs are exchanged) and server-authoritative (one instance computes the true game state and distributes it). Given the requirements and the number of players, a server-authoritative client-server model is the most appropriate:

Deterministic Lockstep (Peer-to-Peer) – Not Ideal Here: In a lockstep model, each client would run the entire game simulation and they would only send each other their input commands. This has the benefit of very low bandwidth usage (network cost is proportional to input size, not number of objects) and perfect sync if it works. However, it requires absolute determinism across all clients and platforms. ZZT’s simulation is largely deterministic (grid-based, no floating point issues, random number usage can be made consistent by sharing seeds), so technically lockstep could be made to work. But with potentially 100 players, lockstep becomes fragile and complex. Every client would have to wait for inputs from 99 others every tick, greatly increasing latency and risking stalls if any packet is delayed. As a reference, lockstep is mainly used in RTS games with small player counts (2-8) because it doesn’t scale well. New players joining late is particularly problematic – the only way to join a lockstep simulation is to transfer the entire current game state to the new client and have them catch up, which is complicated (the game state would need to be serialized and sent). Given these drawbacks, a pure peer-to-peer lockstep approach is not feasible for an MMO-scale ZZT (latency and sync issues would undermine gameplay).

Server-Authoritative Client-Server – Recommended: In this model, the game runs on a central server (or a set of servers for different instances), and each client is essentially an interface: it sends the player’s input to the server and receives the updated game state or events from the server. The server is the single source of truth for the world. This approach is common in modern multiplayer games and MMOs because it handles many players and simplifies consistency (one authority) and cheat-prevention. For our ZZT MMO, we will run the core engine on the server – likely as a Node.js process (if the engine is in JS/TS) or a service running the compiled engine (in C/Rust, etc.). Clients connect via WebSockets (for reliable, bi-directional communication in the browser). Each client maintains a connection to the server, and the server maintains the state of the world plus a mapping of network clients to player objects in the game.

 

State Synchronization Strategy: The server needs to transmit the game state to clients in a timely way so that all players see the world updating roughly simultaneously. There are a few strategies for this:

Broadcast Full State: On each tick (or at a set interval, e.g. 5 times per second), send the entire relevant state of the world to all clients. Given a ZZT board is at most 60×25 cells plus ~hundreds of objects, this is on the order of a few kilobytes of data per update. With 100 players, sending ~2KB 5 times a second is ~10KB/s per client, which might be acceptable. This is the simplest to implement but not the most bandwidth-efficient.
Delta Updates: Send only the changes since the last state. For example, if a bullet moved from (10,10) to (11,10) and nothing else changed, the server can send an update like “tile (10,10) became empty, (11,10) now has a bullet” and any stat changes (object 5 X coordinate +=1). This reduces bandwidth significantly in sparse updates. We can maintain a change log each tick to broadcast. The clients would apply these diffs to their local copy of the world state.
Event-Based: Another method is to send high-level events: e.g. “Player#5 moved up” or “Object#3 shot a bullet” or “Lion at (x,y) died”. This is similar to delta but more semantic. Clients receiving events then reproduce them. This can minimize data and allows client-side prediction (the client might predict its own movement locally).

The initial implementation can use full state sync on a fixed interval for simplicity – ensuring correctness first. As the project grows, we can optimize by moving to delta updates. Modern browser MMO examples like BrowserQuest use a server that maintains state and sends updates via WebSockets to all clients. In fact, BrowserQuest’s architecture (Node.js server broadcasting state to HTML5 clients, using shared code for logic) is a proven template we can emulate for ZZT.

 

Server Tick and Client Render: Suppose the server runs at 10 ticks/sec. It can send out an update after each tick. Clients receive these and update their rendering. To account for network latency and avoid a choppy appearance, clients can interpolate or extrapolate slightly. However, since ZZT is turn-based and not very fast-paced, a small delay (100-200 ms) in seeing other players move is acceptable. We likely do not need complex client-side prediction. The client’s own player can be smoothly animated by anticipating the move (optimistically move the character when key is pressed) and then correcting if the server disagrees. But in a tile-based game, such prediction is straightforward (since moves snap to grid).

 

Server Authoritativeness: The server will validate inputs – e.g. ignore moves that are impossible (walking through a wall) or handle simultaneous actions (if two players try to pick up the same gem at once, the server decides who got there first). All game rules (monster AI, object scripts, physics of bullets, etc.) run on the server, so there is no divergence. Clients basically reflect whatever the server tells them. This also improves security: clients cannot cheat by giving themselves items or altering the world, because the server won’t allow any change except through the proper game logic.

 

Scalability Consideration: A single board with 100 players might become noisy. If needed, the architecture can partition players into multiple instances (just like different “worlds” or game rooms). Each instance could run on the same server process (since each board is isolated) or on separate server processes if scaling out. For example, if we ever allow multiple boards concurrently (players spread out in different ZZT boards), the server could run an engine instance per board and route messages accordingly. This is analogous to how BrowserQuest had multiple world instances on a server. Initially, we can manage with one instance. The code should be written to allow multiple games if needed (for instance, by not using global variables for game state on the server – instead, instantiate an Engine object that holds a world, so we can have many Engine instances for different rooms).

 

Networking Technology: WebSockets will be used for real-time communication. They provide low-latency, full-duplex messaging in browsers. Each message can be a JSON or binary packet. We might use JSON for readability during development (e.g. { type: "move", player: 5, dx: 0, dy: 1 } or a full state object), then consider a binary format for efficiency later. The server will maintain a list of connected clients and their player IDs. When a new player joins, the server creates a new player object in the game world at a suitable location (e.g. a starting position). The current world state is sent to that player (so they can load the board). Then the server broadcasts to others that a new player has joined (so they can display that avatar). Conversely, on disconnect, remove the player’s object and notify others.

In summary, the proposed multiplayer architecture is client-server with a central game loop. This is technically more feasible and maintainable for an MMO: it simplifies synchronization (one authoritative timeline of events) and handles dynamic player counts robustly. The trade-off is higher bandwidth usage than lockstep, but given the small data sizes in ZZT and modern web capabilities, this is acceptable. We will prioritize correctness and consistency, then optimize as needed. By structuring network code as a distinct module, we can upgrade how synchronization works without touching game logic. For instance, switching from full sync to diff-based updates is an internal change transparent to the engine and scripts.

Modular Design and Isolation of Systems for Networking

To achieve architectural elegance and maintainability, the new ZZT MMO should be organized into modular components that interact through clear interfaces. This separation of concerns will make it easier to modify or replace parts (for example, to add the editor later, or to adjust networking) and to debug the system. Below is a proposed division of the system into modules, along with notes on how to isolate networking-specific logic:

Core Engine Module (Simulation & Game State): This module encapsulates the game world state and the rules for updating it. It includes the board data structure, the list of objects (players, creatures, items), and the code that advances the simulation each tick (movement rules, collision detection, applying ZZT-OOP commands, etc.). It should expose an API for key operations (e.g. “spawn player at (x,y)”, “apply input to player”, “nextTick()”, “getState()”). The engine module should be pure logic, with no direct knowledge of rendering or network. For example, when an object wants to display a message, it could raise an event or simply update a data field that the UI module notices; it wouldn’t itself pop up a browser alert. By keeping the engine isolated, we could even run it headless for testing (imagine a unit test that runs 100 ticks and verifies outcomes without any UI). This also makes it portable – in theory, one could run the same engine in a Node context or in a browser. Open-source projects support this separation: the RUZZT project explicitly created a ruzzt_engine crate for “simulating ZZT worlds” reusable for any front-end. Similarly, libzoo was designed as a backend (logic) that different frontends (platform-specific UIs) can use. We will follow that philosophy.
Networking Module: This module handles all communication between the engine and multiple clients. On the server side, it consists of the WebSocket server and the logic for broadcasting messages. On the client side, it’s the WebSocket client connection and handlers for sending inputs and receiving updates. To isolate networking, the engine should not directly send messages; instead, the server loop or a wrapper will call engine functions and then package the results to send out. For instance, after the engine processes a tick, the server’s networking layer might call getState() on the engine and then diff it against the last sent state and send updates to clients. Conversely, when input arrives (say a packet “Player5: move up”), the networking layer will translate that into an engine call like engine.setPlayerDirection(5, NORTH). This design means the engine code doesn’t care if input came from a keyboard or a network – it’s just a function call with an ID. We could even reuse the networking module for AI or replay, e.g. feed recorded inputs. Using Node.js for the server allows us to write the networking in JavaScript and potentially share code with the client and engine. A real example is BrowserQuest, where server and client shared some game logic code since both ran JS. We can do similarly: define the data structures (world, objects) in a common module that is used by both server and client for consistency.
Client-Side Rendering & Input Module: On each client, we have a module responsible for drawing the state to the screen (DOM/CANVAS manipulation) and for capturing user input (keyboard events). This module communicates with the networking module to send inputs and receives game state updates in return. We should design the client such that it could also run in a single-player offline mode by feeding the engine directly – this is a good test of modularity. In multiplayer mode, however, the client’s rendering simply trusts the server state. The rendering code should be flexible to accommodate different viewports; for example, if we later introduce a zoomed-out view or a minimap. It will likely maintain a local copy of the world state as last known (to draw from) and update it when new info comes in.
Synchronization/Update Manager: This could be part of the networking or engine module on the client. Its job is to smooth out the state updates. For example, if the server sends states at 10 Hz, the client might interpolate positions in between if needed or at least schedule draws at the same rate. We might utilize requestAnimationFrame in the browser for drawing and align that with incoming ticks. If we experience jitter, we can implement a short buffer of updates and always render slightly behind real-time to account for network delay (a common technique in networked games). This is an implementation detail, but mentioning it shows we plan to handle network latency gracefully.
Module for Persistence (Future): If the MMO requires saving progress or world modifications (since multiple players might alter a world), a persistence layer would be needed (database or file storage). For now, ZZT worlds can be considered ephemeral or loaded from files, but in a long-running server, we might want to periodically save the state (especially if players can build or modify things). This can be done by serializing the engine state (which, if structured well, is straightforward – e.g. use JSON or a custom format). This module would also handle loading initial boards or switching boards when players travel.

Isolating Systems for Networking: The key pattern is to remove direct hardware dependencies and replace them with abstract interfaces:

In the original code, INPUT.PAS directly reads keyboard interrupts. In our design, the engine will not do that; instead it waits for input via function calls or queued events. The source of those events can be the network or a local stub. This means in a single-player test harness, we could simulate input by calling those functions directly.
The original draws to screen via VIDEO.PAS. In our design, the engine might instead populate a memory buffer or an event like “tile at x,y changed to X”. The rendering system subscribes to those changes or just re-renders the whole board on state update. The engine itself is view-agnostic.
The original game loop sleeps to maintain speed. In our server, we’ll use timers (e.g. setInterval or a game loop using time delta) – but again, the engine doesn’t sleep; the server loop controls the pacing.
Sound in original maybe played via PC speaker directly; in our design, engine might just expose the fact a sound event occurred (e.g. an object sets a flag “playSound: [tone sequence]”), and the client sound module plays it.

By enforcing these separations, we gain maintainability. For instance, if we want to run a debugging UI that prints the world state textually, we can attach a different renderer easily. Or we can unit test the engine by feeding in scripted inputs and checking the state outcome without needing a browser.

 

Example of Modular Interaction: When a client presses a key:

Client Input handler captures “Up arrow” for player 5, sends a message to server: {player:5, action:"move", direction:"N"}.
Server Networking receives this, passes it to Engine: engine.movePlayer(5, NORTH).
Engine processes this input on the next tick, moving the player object if possible and updating game state (e.g. player’s X,Y changes, or if the player moved onto an item, that item is picked up and removed).
After processing the tick, the server calls engine.getStateChanges() which might return “player5 moved to (x,y), item at (x,y) removed, score of player5 +=10” etc.
Server Networking broadcasts these changes to all clients (or a full new state).
Client Networking receives the update. The state update manager module applies it to client’s local state.
Client Rendering sees the state change (player position updated, item gone, score changed) and redraws the necessary tiles and UI (e.g. update player’s score display).
If there’s a sound associated (say picking up an item has a sound), either the engine flagged it or the client deduces it (item type had a sound), and the client Sound module plays it.

None of the modules need to know more than necessary: the input handler doesn’t know how the engine works, the engine doesn’t know about WebSockets or Canvas, and the network module doesn’t know game rules – it’s just ferrying data.

 

This modular approach mirrors designs in some existing engines. For example, the Unity game engine with the Mirror networking library works on similar principles (server authoritative, sync objects states). Even though we aren’t using Unity, the concept of separating game logic from network transport is universal for elegance.

Technical References and Examples

To guide the implementation and avoid reinventing the wheel, we can look at several open-source projects and prior art related to ZZT and web multiplayer:

Reconstruction of ZZT (Pascal source) – The fully commented Turbo Pascal source of ZZT 3.2 is our ground truth for game behavior. We will refer to this for any unclear mechanics or to ensure our rewritten logic is accurate. Having the actual code means we can answer questions about how exactly something should work (e.g. the exact order of object updates, or how a particular ZZT-OOP command executes).
libzoo (C backend of ZZT engine) – This project provides a portable C implementation of ZZT’s engine intended for reuse. It validates that translating the Pascal code to C is doable and can compile on many platforms. If we choose not to use it directly, we can still learn from its structure (it likely has a clear separation between the engine (backend) and any frontends). Its existence under MIT license means we could even incorporate parts of it if needed. For instance, we might use its world file parsing code to load .ZZT files, rather than writing our own from scratch.
RUZZT (Rust ZZT engine) – RUZZT is an accurate Rust clone of ZZT which explicitly made the logic modular and reusable. It even includes a web assembly build for a world editor. This can serve as a reference for how to handle certain tricky parts in a modern language. If we were inclined to use Rust, RUZZT could be a strong starting point (and we could then write a JS/TS wrapper around the compiled WASM for networking). Even if not, studying its source might give insight into structuring the object update loop, storing state, etc., in a safe and robust way.
ZZT.js (JavaScript implementation) – An unfinished but instructive project is ZZT.js, which attempted to recreate ZZT in HTML5/JS. It likely has code for drawing the text mode to canvas and maybe partial code for the game logic. This can help us with the rendering part (how to best render a text grid on Canvas, handle keyboard in JS, etc.). We can also see how that project represented the game state in JavaScript objects, which might inform our data model.
BrowserQuest (HTML5 MMO by Mozilla) – This is a well-known open-source browser MMO example. While it’s a very different game (Zelda-like action RPG), the networking architecture is relevant. BrowserQuest used a Node.js server using WebSockets to handle many players and distributed the load by having multiple instances of the game world. The fact that client and server shared some code in JavaScript is a powerful example for us: we could implement the engine in a way that the same code runs on server and perhaps in a single-player web worker. It demonstrates scaling: thousands of players across instances, which is beyond our need but reassuring. The source code of BrowserQuest (on GitHub) can give concrete patterns for message formats, state synchronization techniques, and error handling in a WebSocket game. We can adopt similar message structure (for example, they likely have message types for movement, attack, chat, etc., we will have for movement, interaction, chat if we add one).
Colyseus or Socket.io – These are frameworks for multiplayer games in Node/JS. We might not use a heavy framework, but they illustrate patterns. Colyseus, for instance, provides a high-level model of rooms and state that auto-syncs to clients. Studying it could inspire how we implement our state sync (like the concept of schema state that is automatically diffed and broadcast). Since we want to keep things custom (for learning and to fit ZZT’s uniqueness), we likely implement from scratch, but referencing their documentation might help solve common problems (like reconciling fast client input with authoritative state).
MegaZeux and Other Clones – MegaZeux is a descendant of ZZT (with a different engine but similar concepts). While MegaZeux isn’t web-based, its source might not directly help, but it could inform how to extend ZZT’s concept to multiple players if any attempts were made. Some community projects or forked engines might have experimented with networking (for example, there was a fork of ZZT called “Weave ZZT” and others; if any had netplay, their approach could be illuminating). However, since the question specifically points to the reconstruction-of-zzt code, our main references remain those tied to that.

In particular, Ben Hoyt’s write-up and Adrian Siekierka’s blog (on asie’s blog) might have insights on the structure of the Pascal code and the challenges faced in reconstructing it – which can hint at potential pitfalls for us. For instance, if certain parts of the code were especially tricky or had unusual behavior, those are areas to watch when rewriting (e.g. the code for line-of-sight, or the bug with conveyor-belts and bombs noted in RUZZT issues).

 

Finally, the ZZT community’s documentation (Museum of ZZT, zzt.org forums) contain a wealth of knowledge on ZZT’s mechanics. We can use these to verify our engine. For example, the community knows the maximum stat limit, or how certain undocumented commands work. This ensures our MMO will be true to ZZT’s spirit and quirks, which is important for acceptance by fans (and for the developer’s own satisfaction that the game feels right).

Conclusion

Transforming ZZT into a browser-based MMO is an ambitious but attainable project. The small, well-understood codebase works in our favor – it can either be directly ported or meticulously rewritten. After analysis, we recommend a clean rewrite or transplant of the ZZT engine to a modern environment, prioritizing a modular architecture where the simulation is decoupled from rendering and input. This will make it much easier to introduce multiplayer support. A server-authoritative model will handle 100 concurrent players reliably, at the cost of more implementation work in networking, but this is justified by the need for synchronization and cheat prevention in an open MMO setting.

 

In practical terms, the plan would proceed as follows (in phases):

Engine Porting Phase: Implement the core ZZT engine in the chosen language (TypeScript for example). Get single-player working in a browser (or Node) with one player, no networking. Use the original code and projects like libzoo/RUZZT as a reference to ensure all game mechanics and the scripting engine function correctly. This includes rendering the board on an HTML5 canvas and basic sound.
Multiplayer Core Phase: Introduce a Node.js server running the engine. Adapt the engine for multiple players as described (multiple player objects, per-player inventories). Develop the networking layer: client sends inputs, server processes, broadcasts state. Test with a few players moving around, ensure the state remains consistent. Handle joining/leaving logic.
Scaling and Gameplay Expansion: Refine the multiplayer experience – optimize state syncing (use delta updates), reduce latency (maybe client-side prediction for movement), and test with higher player counts. Adjust game balance if needed (e.g. if one board is too crowded, consider multiple boards or a larger board). At this stage, the “gameplay environment” objective is achieved: players can co-exist and interact in ZZT world(s).
Editor and Advanced Features: Add the world editor interface in the browser, possibly as an admin tool. This could be done by pausing a game instance and letting an editor module modify the world, or by creating a separate creative mode. Also, extend ZZT-OOP if needed to better support multiplayer (e.g. a way for scripts to reference specific players or do per-player logic). Implement any remaining features from original ZZT (like the scrollable text windows for messages, the save/load of games if desired in MMO context).
Polish and Community Content: Ensure that a large subset of existing ZZT worlds can run in this MMO engine (recognizing that not all single-player puzzle designs make sense with many players, but they run without errors). Possibly provide converters or tools to import those worlds. Add convenience features like a chat system for players (since ZZT didn’t have chat, but an MMO should).

Throughout these phases, maintain the clean separation of modules. This will make debugging easier (for example, we can unit test the scripting parser separately, or swap out the rendering for a textual log in automated tests). It also allows future developers or open-source collaborators to work on one part without fear of breaking others.

 

In conclusion, converting ZZT to a web MMO is feasible with a careful, architecture-driven approach. By leveraging modern technologies (WebSockets, Canvas/WebGL, Node.js) and learning from existing open-source efforts, we can create a multiplayer ZZT that remains true to the original’s charm. The end result will be an innovative blend of retro game design with modern connectivity – players exploring, creating, and interacting in the ASCII dungeons of ZZT together, in real time, from their browsers. With solid engineering practices and community feedback, this plan can be executed in manageable steps, ultimately delivering a technically sound and fun MMO experience.

 

Sources:

Adrian Siekierka, Reconstruction of ZZT – reverse-engineered Turbo Pascal source (GitHub)
Ben Hoyt, ZZT in Go – on translating ZZT’s code and noting other language ports
RUZZT (Rust ZZT Engine) – README notes on goals and design (GitHub)
ZZT community documentation – stat element limit and engine quirks
Glenn Fiedler, “Deterministic Lockstep” – networking model explanation
Getgud.io, Mastering Multiplayer Architecture – lockstep vs client-server trade-offs
Reddit discussion on lockstep vs server (r/gamedev) – notes on rejoining difficulty
Mozilla Hacks: BrowserQuest post – describes the HTML5 MMO architecture (Node.js server, WebSockets, shared JS code)
Sources
Reasoned for 11 seconds

The error you’re seeing means that when Cargo tries to patch the dependency for the dirs crate, it can’t find the local dummy crate we intended to create in the dummy_dirs directory. In our setup, we intended to override the real dirs (which contains Unix‑only code) by using a dummy crate located at ../dummy_dirs. However, Cargo is failing to read /home/shotintoeternity/zztmmo/dummy_dirs/Cargo.toml because that file—or even the directory itself—does not exist.

In simpler terms, the build process is trying to replace the dirs dependency with our dummy version, but the dummy version wasn’t created (or isn’t in the expected location). That's why you see errors like:

"failed to read /home/shotintoeternity/zztmmo/dummy_dirs/Cargo.toml" and
"No such file or directory (os error 2)."

To fix this, you need to ensure that the dummy_dirs directory (with its Cargo.toml and lib.rs) is actually created in the path /home/shotintoeternity/zztmmo/dummy_dirs. If the script didn’t create it or if it was removed, the patch will fail. You might either re-run the part of the script that creates the dummy crate or manually create that directory and its files so that Cargo can use it as the patch for dirs.

In summary: The build fails because the local dummy crate that’s meant to override dirs isn’t present, so Cargo can’t resolve that dependency when building for the wasm32-unknown-unknown target.

Okay, let's think about if we can use this instead: https://github.com/asiekierka/libzoo
Reasoned for 9 seconds

Using libzoo instead of RUZZT is a viable alternative—and it might indeed simplify your PoC. libzoo is a C reimplementation of the ZZT engine that’s been designed with portability in mind. Here are some points to consider and an approach to get started:

Advantages of Using libzoo
Simplicity and Smaller Codebase:
libzoo is known to be compact and well‑documented. Its codebase is easier to understand and modify compared to dealing with the legacy Turbo Pascal source that RUZZT (or its forks) reimplements.
C-to-WASM Compatibility:
Compiling C code to WebAssembly is a well‐trodden path thanks to Emscripten. libzoo may require fewer “hacks” (or patches) to build for the wasm32 target compared to Rust projects that pull in platform‑specific dependencies.
Existing Community Knowledge:
Being a project by asiekierka (the same person behind the reconstruction of ZZT), libzoo has been discussed in various retro‑game communities. This means you’re likely to find helpful guides or documentation that show how to build it on different platforms.
Proposed Steps for a libzoo PoC
1. Clone the libzoo Repository

Clone libzoo from its GitHub page:

git clone https://github.com/asiekierka/libzoo.git

You might want to clone it into a directory like ~/libzoo or somewhere similar.

2. Set Up Emscripten

Ensure you have Emscripten installed and configured. Emscripten will allow you to compile C code into WebAssembly. If you haven’t installed it, follow the instructions on Emscripten’s website (the typical process is to install the SDK via their provided installer).

3. Configure and Compile libzoo for WASM

You’ll want to modify the build configuration for libzoo (or write a new Makefile) that targets wasm32. For example, you might run a command like:

emcc -O2 -s WASM=1 -s EXPORTED_FUNCTIONS="['_main', '_zoo_main', ...]" -o libzoo.js [source_files.c] ...

You’ll need to decide which functions you want to export and perhaps create a slimmed‑down main loop that suits a browser environment (possibly removing any direct input/output that wouldn’t work in a browser).

4. Create JavaScript Bindings

Once libzoo is compiled, you’ll have a WASM module and its accompanying JavaScript glue code. You can then write a thin JavaScript layer that:

Initializes the WASM module.
Provides functions to start or tick the game loop.
Extracts the game state (for example, the current board and object positions) so you can render it via an HTML5 Canvas.
5. Build a Browser‑based PoC

Create a simple HTML page that:

Loads the generated libzoo.js and the WASM module.
Implements a basic game loop on the client: periodically calling a tick function (or using requestAnimationFrame) to update the game.
Renders the board state on a canvas.
Provides basic keyboard input that is forwarded to the libzoo engine (if needed).
6. Iterate and Expand

After establishing that a minimal version of libzoo runs in the browser, you can then incrementally:

Extend the engine to support multiplayer (synchronizing player states across clients).
Integrate additional gameplay features.
Possibly incorporate the original ZZT world editor or scripting functionality.
Example of a Minimal PoC Flow

Building libzoo to WASM (Pseudo‑command):

emcc -O2 -s WASM=1 -s EXPORT_ALL=1 -s "EXTRA_EXPORTED_RUNTIME_METHODS=['ccall','cwrap']" \
-o libzoo.js libzoo.c other_sources.c

(You will need to adjust source filenames and export symbols as appropriate.)

A Minimal HTML File:

<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8" />
  <title>libzoo WASM PoC</title>
  <style>
    canvas { border: 1px solid #ccc; }
  </style>
</head>
<body>
  <h1>libzoo WASM PoC</h1>
  <canvas id="gameCanvas" width="960" height="400"></canvas>
  <script src="libzoo.js"></script>
  <script>
    // Assuming libzoo exports a function zoo_init() and zoo_tick() or similar:
    Module.onRuntimeInitialized = function() {
      // Initialize the engine.
      Module.ccall('zoo_init', null, [], []);
      
      // Main loop: call the tick function every 1000ms.
      setInterval(function() {
        Module.ccall('zoo_tick', null, [], []);
        // For example, you might also call a function to get the game state,
        // then render it onto the canvas.
      }, 1000);
    };
  </script>
</body>
</html>
Iterate the PoC:
Once you have that basic page working, you can refine:
The exported functions from libzoo.
The rendering logic in JavaScript.
The input handling to allow player movement.
Conclusion

Switching to libzoo might simplify your process since it avoids the complexities you encountered with RUZZT’s dependency and patching issues for Unix-specific code. You’ll need to compile it using Emscripten and create a simple browser front-end that calls its functions.

I recommend:

Cloning libzoo.
Setting up Emscripten.
Writing a minimal Makefile or build script for libzoo to WASM.
Writing the integration HTML/JS code as shown above.

This approach should give you a simpler PoC to display the ZZT engine simulation in the browser. Let me know if you need detailed instructions on setting up Emscripten or further guidance on writing a Makefile for libzoo!

shotintoeternity@Legion:~/czzt$ sudo apt install emscripten
[sudo] password for shotintoeternity:
Reading package lists... Done
Building dependency tree... Done
Reading state information... Done
Some packages could not be installed. This may mean that you have
requested an impossible situation or if you are using the unstable
distribution that some required packages have not yet been created
or been moved out of Incoming.
The following information may help to resolve the situation:

The following packages have unmet dependencies:
 node-acorn : Depends: nodejs:any or
                       nodejs (< 12.22.5~dfsg-4~)
E: Unable to correct problems, you have held broken packages.
Reasoned for 9 seconds

The error you’re seeing indicates that installing emscripten via apt is running into dependency issues. The recommended approach is to install Emscripten using its official SDK (emsdk) rather than through the package manager.

Here’s how you can install Emscripten using emsdk:

Clone the emsdk Repository:

Open a terminal and run:

git clone https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk.git
cd emsdk

Install and Activate the Latest SDK:

Use emsdk’s commands to install and activate the latest version:

./emsdk install latest
./emsdk activate latest

Set Up Your Environment:

Once activated, load the environment variables:

source ./emsdk_env.sh

This command sets environment variables such as EMSDK and updates your PATH, so you can now use the emscripten tools (like emcc).

Verify Installation:

You can then check:

emcc -v

This should display version information and confirm that Emscripten is properly installed.

These steps bypass the problematic apt dependencies and install Emscripten via its recommended method. For more details, consult the Emscripten Getting Started Guide.

Let me know if you run into any issues with these steps!
